you probably have the sense as most
people do that polarization is getting
worse in our country that the divide
between the left and the right is as bad
as it's been in really any of our
lifetimes but you might also reasonably
wonder if research backs up your
intuition and in a nutshell the answer
is sadly yes
in study after study we find that
liberals and conservatives have grown
further apart they increasingly wall
themselves off in these ideological
silos consuming different news talking
only to like-minded others and more and
more choosing lives in different parts
of the country and I think that most
alarming of all of it is seeing this
rising animosity on both sides liberals
and conservatives Democrats and
Republicans more and more they just
don't like one another you see it in
many different ways
they don't want to befriend one another
they don't want to date one another if
they do they find out they find each
other less attractive and they more and
more don't want their children to marry
someone who supports the other party
particularly shocking statistic you know
in my lab the students that I work with
we're talking about some social pot some
sort of social pattern I'm a movie buff
and so you know I'm often mopping like
what kind of movie are we in here with
this pattern so what kind of movie are
we in with political polarization well
could be a disaster movie certainly
seems like a disaster could be a war
movie also fist but what I keep thinking
is that we're in a zombie apocalypse
movie
right you know the kind people wandering
around in packs not thinking for
themselves feeds by this mob mentality
is trying to spread their disease and
destroy society and you probably think
as I do that you're the good guy in the
zombie apocalypse movie right and all
this hate and polarization is being
propagated by the other people because
we're Brad Pitt right free thinking
righteous you know trying to hold on to
what we hold dear you know not foot
soldiers in the army of the undead not
that never that but here's the thing
what movie do you suppose they think
they're in right well they absolutely
think that they're the good guys in the
zombie apocalypse movie right and they
better believe that they think that
they're a Brad Pitt and that we we are
the zombies and who's to say that
they're wrong I think that the truth is
that we're all part of this and the good
side of that is that we could be a part
of the solution so what are we going to
do what can we do to chip away at
polarization in everyday life what could
we do to connect with and communicate
with our political counterparts well
these are exactly the questions that I
and my colleague Matt Feinberg became
fascinated with a few years ago which
are doing research on this topic and one
of the first things that we discovered
is I think it's really helpful for
understanding polarization is to
understand that the political divide in
our country is undergirded by a deeper
moral divide so one of the most robust
findings in the history of political
psychology is a pattern identified by
John Hiatt and Jesse Grahm psychologists
that liberals and conservatives tend to
endorse different values to different
degrees so for example we find that
liberals tend to endorse values like
equality and fairness and care and
protection from harm
more than conservatives do and
conservatives tend to endorse values
like loyal
tea patriotism respect for authority and
moral purity more than liberals do and
Matt and I were thinking that maybe this
moral divide might be helpful for
understanding how it is that liberals
and conservatives talk to one another
and why they so often seem to talk past
one another when they do so we conducted
a study where we recruited liberals to a
study where they were supposed to write
a persuasive essay that would be
compelling to a conservative for in
support of same-sex marriage and what we
found was that liberals tended to make
arguments in terms of the liberal moral
values of equality and fairness
so they said things like everyone should
have the right to love whoever they
choose and they they being gay Americans
deserve the same equal rights as other
Americans overall we found that 69% of
liberals invoked one of the more liberal
moral values in constructing their essay
and only nine percent invoked one of the
more conservative moral values even
though they were supposed to be trying
to persuade conservatives and when we
studied conservatives and had them make
persuasive arguments in support of
making English the official language of
the US a classically conservative
political position we found that they
weren't much better at this 59% of them
made arguments in terms of one of the
more conservative moral values and just
8% invoked a liberal moral value even
though they were supposed to be
targeting liberals for persuasion now
you can see right away why we're in
trouble here right people's moral values
I mean they're at their most deeply held
beliefs people are willing to fight and
die for their values why are they going
to give that up just to agree with you
on something that they don't
particularly want to agree with you on
anyway if that persuasive appeal that
you're making to your Republican uncle
means that he doesn't just have to
change his view he's got changes
underlying values too that's not going
to go very far so what would work better
well we believe it's a technique that we
call moral reframing and we've studied
it in a series of experiments and one of
these experiments we recruited liberal
conservatives to a study where they read
one of three essays before having their
environmental attitudes surveyed the
first of these essays was a relatively
conventional pro-environmental essay
that invoked the liberal values of care
and protection from harm
it said things like in many important
ways we are causing real harm to the
places we live in and it is essential
that we take steps now to prevent
further destruction from being done to
our earth
another group of participants were
assigned to read a really different
essay that was designed to tap into the
conservative value of moral purity is
the pro-environmental essay as well and
it said things like keeping our forests
drinking water and skies pure is of
vital importance we should regard the
pollution of the places we live in to be
disgusting and reducing pollution can
help us preserve what is pure and
beautiful about the places we live then
we had a third group of participants
that were assigned to read just a
non-political essay was just a
comparison group so we could get a
baseline and what we found when we
surveyed people about their
environmental attitudes afterwards we
found that liberals didn't really matter
what essay they read they tended to have
highly Pro environmental attitudes
regardless liberals are on board for
Environmental Protection conservatives
however were significantly more
supportive of progressive environmental
policies and Environmental Protection if
they had read the moral purity essay
than if they read one of the other two
essays we even found that conservatives
read the moral purity essay were
significantly more likely to say that
they believed in global warming and
we're concerned about global warming
even though this essay didn't even
mention global warming that's just a
related environmental issue but that's
how robust this moral reframing effect
was and you know we've studied this on a
whole slew of different political issues
so you know if you want to move
conservatives on issues like same-sex
marriage or national health insurance it
helps to tie these liberal political
issues to conservative values like
patriotism and moral purity and we
studied it the other way too if you want
to move liberals to the right on
conservative policy issues like
military spending and making English the
official language of the US it's you're
going to be more persuasive if you tie
those conservative policy issues to
liberal moral values like equality and
fairness all these studies have the same
clear message if you want to persuade
someone on some policy it's helpful to
connect that policy to their underlying
moral values and you know when you say
it like that it seems really obvious
right
like why did we come here tonight why
incredibly intuitive and even though it
is it's something we really struggle to
do you know it turns out and we go that
when we go to persuade somebody on a
political issue we talk like we're
speaking into a mirror we don't persuade
so much as we rehearse our own reasons
for why we believe some sort of
political position you know we kept
saying when we are designing these
reframed moral arguments you know
empathy and respect empathy and respect
if you can tap into that you can connect
and you might be able to persuade
somebody in this country so it's
thinking again about what movie were in
maybe I got carried away before maybe
it's not a zombie apocalypse movie maybe
instead it's a buddy cop movie just roll
with it just go with it
you know the kind there's the white cop
and a black cop or maybe a messy cop and
an organized cop whatever it is they
don't get along because of this
difference but in the end when they have
to come together and they cooperate the
Solidarity that they feel it's greater
because of that goal that they had to
cross right and remember that in these
movies it's usually worse in the second
act when our leads are further apart
than ever before and so maybe that's
where we are in this country late in the
second act of a buddy cop movie
torn apart but about to come back
together it sounds good but if we want
it to happen I think the responsibility
is going to start with us so this is my
call to you let's put this country back
together let's do it
despite the politicians and the media
and Facebook and Twitter and
congressional redistricting and all of
it all the things that divide us let's
do it because it's right and let's do it
because this hate can contempt that
flows through all of us every day makes
us ugly and it corrupts us and it
threatens the very fabric of our society
we owe it to one another in our country
to reach out and try to connect we can't
afford to hate them any longer
and we can't afford to let them hate us
either empathy and respect empathy and
respect if you think about it it's the
very least that we owe our fellow
citizens thank you
you